🐞 Bug Bash wk 2🐞 Add: second lesson and images (#120)
pyOpenSci/python-package-guide: tutorials/1-installable-code.md

# Make your Python code pip installable

> 

Author: ahhhh yes good points. this is where it's a bit challenging to review one lesson at a TIME. BUT maybe a good opportunity to cross link. 

the first lesson - what is a python package has [this section on why working towards a package is important](https://output.circle-artifacts.com/output/job/58110b4c-42f6-412a-a95d-b79ba9244060/artifacts/0/html/tutorials/intro.html#why-create-a-python-package)

at the same time it could be good to have context at the top - from that discussion and then talk about how pip install is a step before publishing the package? 

thoughts? 

so maybe here we compare local pip installs vs a package on pypi as well (which they'll learn to do in a later lesson?) @kierisi would that address your question without repeating the first lesson? or perhaps the first lesson doesn't quite get there either... i'll take a stab at an overview on top of the learning objectives that also links to lesson one.

> 

Author: added this as a reminder of what was covered in the previous lesson

> In the previous lesson, you learned about both what a Python package is. You also learned about the [benefits of creating a Python 
> package](tutorials/intro.html#why-create-a-python-package) including: 
> 
> * Being able to easily reuse in multiple workflows on your computer 
> * Being able to share your code with others who may find the functionality useful. 
> * Being able to better organize code that needs to be reused.

> 

Reviewer: @leah I think that partially gets at it, but is a couple steps beyond what a beginner might be looking for. I think at a basic level what I'd want to know at this stage is a plain-language definition of pip and why it matters.

for context, when I google "what is pip?" it takes me a bit of searching and multiple clicks to get to a simple definition, because most sites jump past defining pip and instead go straight into how to use it. so I think a combination of something like "pip is the package installer for python, and unlocks the ability to reuse code in multiple workflows....etc."

The first step in creating a Python package based on code that you

> have is to make that code pip installable. You will learn how to make

Author: ok i have a question @ucodery is there a way to install this type of package with conda? it never occurred to me that one could conda install a package locally if it wasn't a "conda packaged package" if that makes sense.

i'm fine with backing off the language pip. as i suppose you could do a hatch install or pdm install or poetry install too! 

but your comment made me wonder about the range of tools that could actually install a package beyond pip and whether conda was actually in the mix. 

for now i'll leave this comment open and will reread the lesson with that lense given at a minimum hatch, poetry and pdm (and flit??) could all potentially install this package we are teaching them to create here.

> have is to make that code pip installable. You will learn how to make

Reviewer 2: I don't use conda, so I don't know if it can do a local install. As for the other packaging tools, those that are package managers can install as you noted (so not flit). There is also the low-level `installer` tool as well as older, deprecated installers such as `easy_install`.

> have is to make that code pip installable. You will learn how to make

Author: got it - thank you! 

The reason why i've been careful about pip vs conda here is that a lot of scientists use conda (me included). And installing a conda version of python is so so easy - you can easily then create envts using various python versions with a single command, and it's friendlier if you are using tools that process spatial data. 

so many will come from a conda background and need to understand how pip vs conda works. if we rely ONLY on python.org python and pip some scientists will have to relearn envt management. and it will get confusing i think. 

either way i think this will be a bit of a thorn that we need to polish down in our lessons - which is why i thought about suggesting conda but having instructions for a non conda envt manager as well such as venv given it's native to python installs. then we can have a lesson (i have one started already) on venv vs conda installs.

> have is to make that code pip installable. You will learn how to make

Author: leaving this open for now. as it might warrant more discussion in slack  / here to get it right!

your code pip installable in this lesson.

> <!--

Reviewer 3: Let's remove the comment and create a checklist of questions in a github issue.

TODO: is it clear where to add commands? bash vs. python console

Bash vs zsh is different
does this work on windows and mac? i know it works on mac/linux
-->

:::{figure-md} code-to-script

<img src="../images/tutorials/code-to-script-diagram.png" alt="Diagram showing the basic steps to creating an installable package. There are 4 boxes with arrows pointing towards the right. The boxes read, your code, create package structure, add metadata to pyproject.toml and pip install package." width="700px">

> A basic installable package needs a few things. Code, a specific package structure and a `pyproject.toml` containing your package's name and version. Once you have these items in the correct directory structure, you can pip install your package into any environment on your computer.

Reviewer: a question: will the guide walk through the "correct directory structure"? if so, it's worth mentioning it, and if not, linking to a resource, so that beginners know what a correct directory structure looks like.

> A basic installable package needs a few things. Code, a specific package structure and a `pyproject.toml` containing your package's name and version. Once you have these items in the correct directory structure, you can pip install your package into any environment on your computer.

Author: great question! it will

first we have [this publishedpage](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/package-structure-code/python-package-structure.html) that already overviews the structure.

and then each lesson will help them understand how to create that structure. so maybe i'll start by adding a link to this file structure guidebook page that already exists. Then maybe we can think about whether the structure they are working towards is clear enough in the tutorials?

> A basic installable package needs a few things. Code, a specific package structure and a `pyproject.toml` containing your package's name and version. Once you have these items in the correct directory structure, you can pip install your package into any environment on your computer.

Author: i've added a link here for the time being!

:::

:::{admonition} Learning Objectives
:class: tip

In this lesson you will learn:

> - How to make your code installable into a Python environment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- How to make your code pip-installable into a Python environment
```

> - How to create a basic `pyproject.toml` file to declare dependencies and metadata

Author: that would be awesome. i wonder if there is a sphinx extension that would help us do this. could be worth asking in slack to see if someone knows of such a thing

[jupyterbook has one!](https://jupyterbook.org/en/stable/reference/glossary.html)

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/executablebooks/jupyter-book/master/docs/reference/glossary.md

and it looks like there is a sphinx [glossary directive](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html#glossary) we can employ as well.

> - How to create a basic `pyproject.toml` file to declare dependencies and metadata

Author: oh wow and then it automagically creates a link when you use the term!! that's really awesome. we can do this easily @kierisi all we need to do is start the list of terms and definitions and add it in a PR within that glossary directive element!! want to create an issue around this? we could literally work on it at any time and perhaps the first step is just a list of terms in a hackmd or something that we can work on fleshing out with the community?

> - How to create a basic `pyproject.toml` file to declare dependencies and metadata

Reviewer: @lwasser that's amazing! I'll get an issue up ✍️

> - How to create a basic `pyproject.toml` file to declare dependencies and metadata

Author: thank you so much! i didn't know that feature existed. I'll create an asana task to align with that issue. 

what if our next bug bash is a create a list of glossary terms and definitions in a hackmd file?? what do you think about that? it could be accessible to everyone as for some they can just list packaging terms they want defined and for others they can help write definitions, etc?

> - How to create a basic `pyproject.toml` file to declare dependencies and metadata

Author: i created an asana task where we can have a conversation about this since it's separate from this pr!! i'll resolve this issue and we can continue the convo in asana!! :)

- How to declare a build backend which will be used to build and install your package (learn more about what build back ends are here - link to guide)
- How to install your package in editable mode for interactive development

To complete this lesson you will need a local Python (development)
environment. You are welcome to use any environment manager that you chose.

> * [If you need guidance creating a Python environment, review this lesson](extras/1-create-environment.md) which walks you through creating an environment using both `venv` and `conda`.

Author: yay! that lesson won't be published YET when we publish this lesson but i started it!!

* If you aren't sure which environment manager to use and

> you are a scientist, we suggest that you use `conda`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you are a scientist, we suggest that you begin with `conda` because conda offers flexibility to extend to other programming languages, such as C, C++.
```

> you are a scientist, we suggest that you use `conda`.

Reviewer 3: Now that I'm reading more of this I think I would use pip as the suggestion in this doc instead of conda if we're going to use pip-installable term.

Another approach would be to substitute `package-installable` or `install-ready` for `pip-installable`.

> you are a scientist, we suggest that you use `conda`.

Author: this is hard. generally i think for creating a basic package it's really easy to not worry about what envt manager to use. however for anyone  that needs to work with things like spatial data, conda is the way to go. it's how i always used to teach. but the confusing part here is that we are building with pip because the pip / pypi packaging ecosystem is more straightforward to teach and most people start with publishing to pypi. 

the biggest reason for scientists to use conda is really related to dependency conflicts particularly around gdal. And then for others creating packages sometimes conda is the only easy(ish) option because of that extensibility of tools in other languages that conda offers. 

as such i'm going to think about this comment a bit more before acting on it! and might adjust the language to say - if you are a scientist, you might find conda to be easier to work with - especifically if you deal with spatial data. 

it's really hard to teach multiple envt managers and really easy to teach

install mini-conda / or mamba-forge distribution then use conda as your main tool.

vs use venv but if you use conda you may want to ... download and install ... etc etc.

> you are a scientist, we suggest that you use `conda`.

Author: in the meantime i've added this @kierisi to try to provide a bit of context! this is a super tricky area particularly for teaching!!

> * If you aren't sure which environment manager to use and
> you are a scientist, we suggest that you use `conda`, particularly if you are working with any sort of spatial data.

:::

## Make your package installable

:::{figure-md} packages-environment

<img src="../images/tutorials/environment-package-install.png" alt="This diagram has two smaller boxes with arrows pointing to the right to a python environment. The small boxes read your-package and pip install package. The environment box on the right reads - your python environment. It them lists your-package along with a few other core packages such as matplotlib, numpy, pandas, xarray and geopandas." width="700px">

> Making your code pip installable is the first step towards creating a Python package. Once it is pip installable, you can add it to any Python environment on your computer and import that package in the same way that you might import a package such as `Pandas` or `Geopandas`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Making your source code pip-installable is the first step towards creating a Python package. Once your code is pip-installable, it is a Python package and can be added to any Python environment on your computer and imported in the same way that you might import a package such as `Pandas` or `Geopandas`.
```

> Making your code pip installable is the first step towards creating a Python package. Once it is pip installable, you can add it to any Python environment on your computer and import that package in the same way that you might import a package such as `Pandas` or `Geopandas`.

Author: the first sentence of the tutorial is this:

> The first step in creating a Python package based on code that you
have is to make that code pip installable. 

https://github.com/pyOpenSci/python-package-guide/pull/120/commits/6f9dfc903195640182ec0a8096e51f8dfe96491e#diff-d86e55c44552bbc3bbe1d02b617cd0031215ae09f9aff67c3ff3c43df74e75b5R3

so i'm not sure what to adjust here! do you want that statement at the top adjusted to read like this one (**making your code installable**... is first?)

what i have at the top of the lesson now moves that language down some but it's still there:

```md
In the previous lesson, you learned about both what a Python package is. You also learned about the [benefits of creating a Python 
package](tutorials/intro.html#why-create-a-python-package) including: 

* Being able to easily reuse in multiple workflows on your computer 
* Being able to share your code with others who may find the functionality useful. 
* Being able to better organize code that needs to be reused. 

The first step in creating a Python package is turning that 
code into a Python package that is pip installable. 
The package that you create in this lesson will have 
the bare minimum elements that you need to install a package.
```

> Making your code pip installable is the first step towards creating a Python package. Once it is pip installable, you can add it to any Python environment on your computer and import that package in the same way that you might import a package such as `Pandas` or `Geopandas`.

Reviewer: @lwasser honestly now that I'm looking at it I'm not sure what I was thinking 🙈

:::

## Make a basic Python package

It’s time to create the most basic version of a Python package.
While this code can't be yet published to PyPI or conda and
is not documented, it will be installable on your computer or

> anyone elses.

Reviewer: I wonder if changing the structure of this a bit could help with clarity, something like:

"It's time to create the most basic version of a Python package."

What you'll be able to do with this package:
- Install on your computer
- Install on someone else's computer (by sharing... more info on how you'd do this)

What you won't be able to do with this package:
- Publish to PyPI
- Publish to conda

> anyone elses.

Reviewer 3: I like this suggestion. It can be shared via a file or repo with others at this stage.

In a later lesson, you will learn how to publish your package to a package repository (PyPI, conda-forge, conda channels) for distribution to the wider global community.

> anyone elses.

Author: that's a lot more clear AND also sets up the user for why they'd want to continue with the lessons!! love it. working on this locally now.

> anyone elses.

Author: i think it's great. i won't be able to add links to future lessons but i'll create an issue - because once everything is published we can create cross links...

> anyone elses.

Author: much clearer message this way!!

### What does a basic package directory structure look like?
To make your code installable you need:

- A `pyproject.toml` file

> - An (optional but recommended) `__init__.py` file in your code directory

Reviewer 3: I would remove the `__init__.py` or make it the 4th bullet. 

If `__init__.py` is included, the directory that contains it to can be directly imported by someone using the package. 

For example, `import pyospackage`

> - An (optional but recommended) `__init__.py` file in your code directory

Reviewer 3: Yeah @ucodery. I agree let's make it required but specify that the file can be empty/blank.

> - An (optional but recommended) `__init__.py` file in your code directory

Author: another great convo y'all. i just modified - removed the optional language and reordered. i think that should address all comments here!

- A specific directory structure

> - Some code.

Reviewer: doe my code need to do anything specific? for example, in R your package can be a single function, or a massive package that accomplishes a host of tasks. does Python have something similar?

it might also be helpful to provide some sample code so that anyone can run the tutorial with that code chunk.

Reviewer 3: It's similar to R in this regard though I think it would be confusing to mention this.

I do love the sample code.

Author: friends - at the bottom of the lesson i have them actually create the module and do provide runnable code examples so they don't have to create their own code. 

The top of the lesson explains what they are doing and the bottom is hands on - do the thing with everything they need.

there is also an [example repo](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/pyosPackage)  that (will have)  the example replicated workflow that they can download / clone!! but it won't be done until we agree on all elements of the lesson (which we are super close to here i think!!)

i hope that helps. 

@kierisi your question is an interesting one. Are you suggesting a small breakout perhaps that just says - you can have as many or as few functions, classes etc in a package?  we could add something like that

Reviewer: @lwasser that would be really helpful! one thing I've seen a lot in the R community is confusion about what makes something "package worthy", with a common misconception being that a package should be production-ready code that's valuable to a broad audience. this may not be a pervasive misconception in python, but a quick break-out with an explanation of what a package can consist of would be helpful.

Author: ok great. noted. i'll try to add a small breakout about this to the text. 

i think there are two types of "packages" here to talk about

1. someone packaging up some code for the purposes of internal use. being installable in envts etc.  vs
2. something more broadly useful that you want others to use. 
there's probably a spectrum above but pyopensci for instance wouldn't review anything so there is that "package worthy" criteria because we care about long term maintenance and use. and in the latter case you'd then want tests and docs and general application. vs the former where something that just runs for the purposes of your work is good enough.

The directory structure you’ll create in this first section looks like this:

```bash
pyospackage/
     └─ pyproject.toml

>      └─ src/  # The src directory ensures your tests always run on the installed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     └─ src/  # The src directory ensures your tests always run on the installed version of your code
```

Author: GitHub gui is doing weird things but i've applied this locally. it's not allowing me to commit things now.

>      └─ src/  # The src directory ensures your tests always run on the installed

Author: love it

i modified it: `source (src/)` so they have both

>              └── pyospackage/ # Package directory where code lives, use the package name

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
             └── pyospackage/  # Package directory where code lives, use the package name
```

Reviewer 3: For readability, Python uses 2 spaces before a comment. While this is technically not Python, adding the extra space will improve readability.

Author: fixed!

              	      ├── __init__.py
                      ├── add_numbers.py
                      └── # Add any other .py modules that you want here
```

Below, you will learn about each element of the above package structure.

### About the basic package directory structure

Notice a few things about the above layout:

> 

Author: good point. i've added this:

> 1. The name of the root directory for the package is **pyospackage** which is the name of the package. This is not a requirement but you will often see that the GitHub / GitLab repo and the root directory name are the same as the package name.

> 1. Your package code lives within a `src/packagename` directory. We suggest that you use `src/` directory as it ensure you are running tests on the installed version of your code. However, you are welcome to instead use a [flat layout](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/package-structure-code/python-package-structure.html#about-the-flat-python-package-layout) which does not have a src/ directory at the root. [Learn more here.](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/package-structure-code/python-package-structure.html#the-src-layout-and-testing)

Author: ugh i'm adding these manually . Great catch i'm just fighting with GitHub today and am not sure why!! thank you for this edit!!

2. Within the `src/` directory you have a package directory called `pyospackage/`. Use the name of your package for that directory name.
3. In your package directory, you have an `__init__.py` file and all of your Python modules.
4. The `pyproject.toml` file lives at the root directory of your package.

> ## Init.py and pyproject.toml files

Author: fixed locally!

The `__init__.py` and `pyproject.toml` files in the above layout

> are important to understand. More on that below.

Reviewer: "More on that below." is really helpful signposting for beginners.

> ### What is an init.py file?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### What is an `__init__.py` file?
```

> The `__init__.py` file tells Python that the directory it’s in should be treated as a Python package.

Reviewer: what is the "it's" referring to? it's unclear, and could read as Python or the `__init__.py` file.

Reviewer 3: If `__init__.py` is included, the directory that contains the file can be directly imported by someone using the package. For example, `import pyospackage`

Author: thank you! tried to clarify this some locally!!

The `__init__.py` file also:

> - Allows you to organize multiple modules within the package.

Author: good point. i'll reread this after i've removed that shortcut section below (following our discussions in slack) and will revisit. i agree this might be too much complexity especially after our convos in slack!

> - Allows you to create shortcuts for importing specific functions, and classes into your code (more on that later!)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allows you to create shortcuts for importing specific functions and classes into your code (more on that later!)
```

- Allows you to create a version object for people to call **version**

> :::{admonition} The **init**.py file

Author: fixed!!

:class: tip

> Since Python 3.3 came out, you can install a package without an `__init__.py` file. However, we suggest that you include it in your package structure as it allows you to customize your package’s user experience.

Reviewer 3: We should mention that `__init__.py` can be an empty / blank file.

Author: fixed!

> Since Python 3.3 came out, you can install a package without an `__init__.py` file. However, we suggest that you include it in your package structure as it allows you to customize your package’s user experience.

Author: i hear ya. good point! i'll revisit this - it's a small breakout comment for those who might ask about these things. for instance when i googled / searched for __init__.py i got a lot of confusing info!! so i just thought it might be nice for someone who googles it and sees it may be optional - for us to just address it (but in a breakout!). i'll revisit this!!

:::

### What is a pyproject.toml file?

The **pyproject.toml** file is:

> - Where you store your project’s metadata (including its name, authors, license, etc)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Where you define your project’s metadata (including its name, authors, license, etc)
```

> - Where you store dependencies (the packages that it depends on)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Where you list dependencies (the packages that it depends on)
```

> - Used to specify and configure what build back end you want to use to build your package distributions that are used for PyPI publication.

Reviewer: this is a little confusing to me, as earlier in the tutorial we said we wouldn't be able to publish our package to PyPI, so seeing this here makes me wonder why we're concerned about it.

Reviewer 3: Agreed. Let's remove mention of publication since we recommended conda and that wouldn't be published to PyPI.

Author: hmmmm i'll reread the page -- we didn't say we wouldn't be able to publish to pypi (i hope!). we could teach that in this lesson. but we aren't teaching that in this lesson purposefully! so it's more about how the lesson is scoped. but all 3 of these bullets provide an overview of what the pyproject.toml is for  (and most of that we don't teach in this lesson). so i'm wondering is it just that the publication word is there and that throws folks off? 

Perhaps the resolution is to be really clear that this is an overview and they'll learn more about all 3 things in later lessons?  i'll leave this open and will revisit!!

> - Used to specify and configure what build back end you want to use to build your package distributions that are used for PyPI publication.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Used to specify and configure what build back end you want to use to build your package
```

Author: ive added a link to the build python packages page in hopes it clarifies things. @kierisi i also implemented this change locally of removing the word publication while keeping the rest. 

hopefully that is more clear now!

> After the `__init__.py` and `pyproject.toml` files have been added, your package can be built and distributed as an installable Python package using tools such as pip. Note that the `pyproject.toml` file needs to have the a few basic items defined for it to be installable including:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the `__init__.py` and `pyproject.toml` files have been added, your package can be built and distributed as an installable Python package using tools such as pip. Note that the `pyproject.toml` file needs to have a few basic items defined for the package to be installable including:
```

- The `build-backend` that you want to use,
- The project `name` and `version`.

:::{admonition} Why the pyproject.toml file is important
:class: tip

The `pyproject.toml` file replaces some of the functionality of both the setup.py file and setup.cfg files.
If you try to pip install a package with no `pyproject.toml` you will get the following error:

```bash
GitHub/pyospackage/testme
➜ pip install .
ERROR: Directory '.' is not installable.
Neither 'setup.py' nor 'pyproject.toml' found.
```

:::

> ## Try it yourself - Create your package!

Reviewer 2: I find it really jarring that I was just told what pyproject.toml needs and then, instead of expanding on that point or seeing an example toml file, I switch immediately to file structure. Which I know from the opening goals is a totally different topic.

Author: i hear you. this also relates to some of the comments above i think that @willingc @kierisi had above about code examples, etc. i'm not sure how to address this yet but will think about it and am open to ideas. 

the idea for this lesson is that at the top it explains all of the things someone needs to know about the package. at the bottom they do it and no longer need as much context. this might be similar to how you might teaching things (sometimes) depending on the topic. 

And often people skip the how to explanation and just want the "how to do it"

An alternative design could be to try to integrate the how to with the explanation which can work as well. it just takes longer to get through the lesson and there's not quick " how to do it" section. 

OR we could have the how to do the thing part at the very top. 

SO i'll leave this comment open as well and will keep working through comments and then will revisit the overall lesson design!

Reviewer: throwing in an idea - the general structure I use for teaching something is "I do, we do, you do", which could be sign-posted early in the lesson. the way I structure around this would be:
* I do: think of this as a lecture portion, where we'll go through all the major points that you need to be able to accomplish this task
* we do: this is where we'll work with a toy example together, and we'll dig into some of the finer points of the topic and touch on areas where there are common misconceptions//difficulties
* you do: apply what you've learned to your own code, along with a few additional things to consider (essentially getting deeper in the weeds)

then close out by summarizing what was learned and queueing up the next lesson

Now that you understand the basics, it's time to create a Python package! Below you will create a directory structure similar to the structure described above.

> If you don’t wish to create each of the files and directories below, you can always [fork and clone and customize the pyOpenSci example package, here.](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/pyosPackage)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don’t wish to create each of the files and directories below, you can always [fork and clone and customize the pyOpenSci example package.](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/pyosPackage)
```

### Step 1: Set Up the Package Directory Structure

> Create a new directory for your package. Choose a name for your package, preferably in lowercase and without spaces (e.g., "pyospackage_yourname").

Reviewer: I know this seems basic, but beginners don't always know that a folder and directory are the same thing. it might be worth clarifying the first time directory is used, and then repeating throughout the tutorial.

> Inside the package directory,

Reviewer 2: Note that earlier you called the directory under `src` the package directory (which I believe is the correct label). I would call this directory the project directory. Although I know that for beginners project is probably synonymous with package. Could also use repository directory, although in hyper-specific definitions I would consider that a distinct definition as well.

Author: i've made this change throughout. you are right. i was sometimes calling the entire directory (the project directory) the package directory . it's clearer now!

> - Create a `src/` directory

Reviewer: it would be beneficial to provide a quick Create a `src/` directory by... and giving a 1-2 sentence bit of instruction on this.

Reviewer 3: You probably want this to be a `src` directory and drop the slash.

Author: ok got it. 

can you please test this in shell for me? it works in my zsh shell so far

```bash
# Create a project directory in shell and a src directory within
mkdir -R pyospackage/src/pyospackage
# Change directory into pyospackage project dir 
cd pyospackage 
# View the current file structure 
ls
```

```bash
# Create a pyproject.toml file in your project directory 
touch pyproject.toml
# Create an empty init file within your src/pyospackage directory 
touch src/pyospackage/__init__.py
```

Your final project directory structure should look like this:

```bash
pyospackage/  # This is your project directory
     └─ pyproject.toml
     └─ src/ # This is your package directory where your code lives
             └── pyospackage_yourname/
              	     ├── __init__.py
```

Reviewer 2: I've never used a `mkdir` with a `-R` option. I think you might have meant `mkdir -p`

Author: 🙈 and i think i just made up a flag didn't i? thank you for the catch!! you are right. i am not sure where i got R from TBH.  recursive? 🤷‍♀️

- Within the `src/` directory, create a directory that is named after your package. This subdirectory will contain your package’s code.
- It is ok if the main directory of your package and the directory in `src/` have the same name

Next create two files:

> - Inside the package directory, create a new file named `__init__.py` . This file ensures Python sees this directory as a package. You will use this file to customize how parts of your package are imported and to declare your package’s version in a future lesson.

Reviewer 2: Well now you've labeled two directories as package. This is very ambiguous right now.

Author: got it. technically isn't 

`src/pyospackage` the actual package directory (`src` is just a container for the package) whereas src/pyosppackage has the __init__.py file ?

would you agree? i've never thought about this but see how it could be super confusing. what is the package directory? 

src/pyospackage or just the pyospackage dir? 

so in shell we could do

Create the pyospackage project src and package directory like this:
```
mkdir -R pyospackage/src/pyospackage
```

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think I agree with you. And you may have figured this out with my other comments but `src/pyospackage` is the package directory because only its contents make it into the python package (distribution). The top level directory `pyospackage` is the project directory because it contains the package _and more_. A project could technically contain multiple packages (flit does this) but a package is contained by only one project.

> - At the root of your directory, create a file called `pyproject.toml`

Reviewer 2: "root of your project" maybe. Or use the other label "In the project directory" Directories don't have roots, except maybe the mount root.

Author: fixed!

Your final package directory structure should look like this:

```
pyospackage/
     └─ pyproject.toml
     └─ src/

>              └── pyospackage_yourname/

Reviewer 2: Where did `_yourname` come from? The earlier FS example had both directories named `pyospackage` and the bulleted directions just above said to name the first directory `pyospackage_yourname`

Author: i hear you. this is because when they go to publish to test_pypi they need to have a unique name. so i'm trying to set them up for success. but i suppose we could skip this for now as perhaps they only need to change the name in the pyproject.toml file which is the final source of metadata truth.

i just worry that will be confusing. i always found it was confusing to have a project directory name, a GitHub repo name and a package directory name + the name in the pyproject.toml (or setup.py file). i was never sure where the actual project name came from (if that makes sense).

Author: i have removed this for now and am noting that in the next lesson we can emphasize - the pyproject.toml file is the "final truth" for metadata such as package name

              	     ├── __init__.py
```

### Step 2: Add code to your package

Within the `pyospackage` subdirectory, add 1 or more Python modules
(.py files) containing the code that you want your package to access and run.
If you don't have code already and are just learning how to
create a Python
package, then create an empty `add_numbers.py` file.

:::{admonition} Python modules and the __init__.py file
:class: tip

> When you see the word module, we are referring to a `.py` file containing Python

Reviewer: I love that this is defined - it would be beneficial to also define it earlier in the tutorial as well as here

code.

> The _init_.py  allows Python to recognize that a directory contains at least one

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `__init__.py`  allows Python to recognize that a directory contains at least one
```

Author: fixed locally!!

2. It uses [typing](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/documentation/write-user-documentation/document-your-code-api-docstrings.html#adding-type-hints-to-your-docstrings)

If you aren’t familiar with docstrings or typing yet, that is ok. We will get
to it later in our tutorial series. Or, you can review the pyOpenSci [packaging guide](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/documentation/write-user-documentation/document-your-code-api-docstrings.html)
for an overview.

```python
def add_num(a: int, b: int) -> int:
    """
    Add two numbers.

    Parameters
    ----------
    a : int
        The first number to be added.
    b : int
        The second number to be added.

    Returns
    -------
    int
        The sum of the two input numbers (a + b).

    Examples
    --------
    >>> add_num(3, 5)
    8
    >>> add_num(-2, 7)
    5
    """
    return a + b
```

### Step 4. Add metadata to your `pyproject.toml` file

Next, you will add some metadata (information) to your `pyproject.toml` file. You are

> are welcome to copy the file we have in our example repo here.

Reviewer: it looks like a link might be missing

Author: fixed!

:::{admonition} Brief overview of the TOML file
:class: tip

The TOML format consists of tables and variables. Tables are sections of information denoted by square brackets:

`[this-is-a-table]`.

Tables can contain variables within them defined by an variable name and
an `=` sign. For
instance, a `build-system` table most often holds 2 variables:

> 1. `requires = `, which tells a build tool what tools it needs to install prior to building your package. in this case is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `requires = `, which tells a build tool what tools it needs to install prior to building your package. In this case
```

   [hatchling](https://pypi.org/project/hatchling/)

> 2. `build-backend` is used to define specific build-backend name, (in this example we are using `hatchling.build`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. `build-backend = `, which is used to define the specific build-backend name, (in this example we are using `hatchling.build`).
```

> TOML organizes data structures, defining relationships within a configuration

Reviewer 2: Should probably also reference the official docs, as the spec supports a few more types https://toml.io/en/

Author: added!

file. You will learn more about the `pyproject.toml` format in the
[next lesson when you add additional metadata / information to this file.](5-pyproject-toml.md)

```toml
# An example of the build-system table which contains two variables - requires and build-backend
[build-system]
requires = ["hatchling"]
build-backend = "hatchling.build"
```

[Learn more about the pyproject.toml format here.](../package-structure-code/pyproject-toml-python-package-metadata)
:::

- Open up your `pyproject.toml` file in your favorite text editor.
- Add the metadata below to your `pyproject.toml`

```toml
[build-system]
requires = ["hatchling"]
build-backend = "hatchling.build"

[project]

> name = "pyospackage_gh_user_name" # rename this if you plan to publish to test PyPI

Reviewer 2: I get this is supposed to encourage uniqueness, but it doesn't match either the `pyospackage` or `pyospackage_yourname` used earlier and both times you said it should match the project name. I would say just use `pyospackage` because then readers can test out a local installation without surprises.

Author: ok fixed. we can deal with this in a later lesson when it will catch up with them that pyospackage is already on pypi.

> # Here you add the package version manually. You will learn how to setup # dynamic versioning in a followup tutorial.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Here you add the package version manually. You will learn how to setup dynamic versioning in a followup tutorial.
```

> version="1.1"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
version = "1.1"
```

```

Note that above you manually add your package's version number to the
`pyproject.toml` file. You will learn how to automate defining a package
version using git tags in the version and release your package lesson. <ADD LINK>

:::{admonition} The bare minimum needed in a pyproject.toml file
:class: tip

> The core basic information that you need in a `pyproject.toml` file in order to publish on PyPI is your **package's name**  and the **version**. However, we suggest that you flesh out your metadata early on in the `pyproject.toml` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The core information that you need in a `pyproject.toml` file in order to publish on PyPI is your **package's name**  and the **version**. However, we suggest that you flesh out your metadata early on in the `pyproject.toml` file.
```

Once you have your project metadata in the pyproject.toml file, you will
rarely update it. In the next lesson you’ll add more metadata and structure to this file.
:::

### Step 5. Install your package locally

At this point you should have:

1. A project directory structure with a `pyproject.toml` file at the root
2. A package directory containing an empty `__init__.py` file and
3. At least one Python module (e.g. `add_numbers.py`)

You are now ready to install (and build) your Python package!

Let’s try it out.

> - First open bash and `cd` into your package directory

Reviewer 2: Really not sure if shell or bash is more beginner-friendly. And this won't be helpful to (a lot of) Windows users. Both Mac and Windows have a "open terminal at this location" menu option in their file explorers. But maybe that's too non-technical with all the commands we are about to drop.

Reviewer 2: Also, this needs to be the project directory (or however we identity the top-most directory) as if you go into `src/pyosproject` pip won't see the pyproject.toml.

Author: ahhh you're right. 
SO... when i used to teach bash we'd have people install gitbash for windows. mac / linuxy types have it easier in terms of setup. 

but for language maybe we use shell throughout rather than bash / zsh etc etc?? and then i need to get my bash lesson pulled together to support users (and possible at the top mention windows users might want gitbash unless things have changed in the windows world with their terminal? i am no longer a windows user!!

Author: what if i link to the carpentry shell lesson for now!?

https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/

that might be the best option - i'll add this as a "what's needed for this lessons" at the top

Reviewer 2: I would stick to `shell` whenever possible, yes. As most of these commands are more POSIX utilities than shell behaviour (except, of course, `cd`, but it basically works the same across all linux shells).

IME programming, WLS is stable, widely available, and the preferred tool for Windows users to use for OSS projects/tutorials. I wouldn't be surprised if a lot of sill-relevant guides still recommended git-bash but we should at least consider steering our Windows users towards WSL.

- Activate the Python environment that you wish to use. If you need help with working with virtual environments [check out this lesson](extras/1-create-environment.md).
- Finally run `python -m pip install -e .`

```bash
# Activate your environment using conda or venv
# Below we use conda but you can do the same thing with venv!
> conda activate pyosdev
(pyosdev)
>> conda info
    active environment : pyosdev
    active env location : /Users/your-path/mambaforge/envs/pyosdev
# Install the package

> >> python -m pip install -e .

Reviewer 2: Not a conda user, but its my understanding that its better practice to avoid mixing pip and conda envs. This seems like the start of a bad habbit?

Author: i hear you. i think this is going to be confusing for both conda and non conda users. 

i suppose a conda version of python will come with venv so we could teach venv but then anyone who is used to using conda envts needs to learn a new envt management tool. venv users won't have any issue. 

if you are a conda user you will likely be pip installing your package locally as a part of your dev process. 

maybe i could have the conda version of this in a tab and the venv version a default? there is no real way to get around (that i know of) an editable install that is "pip /pypi based" if you are a conda user.

Obtaining file:///Users/leahawasser/Documents/GitHub/pyos/pyosPackage
  Installing build dependencies ... done
  Checking if build backend supports build_editable ... done
  Getting requirements to build editable ... done

# Check to see if the package is installed
> conda list
# use pip list instead of conda list here if you are working in an venv environment rather than a conda envt
```

:::{admonition}  What does `pip install -e .` do?
:class: tip

Let's break down `pip install -e .`

`pip install -e .` installs your package into the current active
Python environment in **editable mode** (`-e`). Installing your package in
editable mode, allows you to work on your code and then test the updates

> interactively in your favorite Python interface. One important caveat of editable mode is that every time you update your code, you may need to restart your Python kernel.

Reviewer 2: kernel is very Jupyter-specific. I would say interpreter, but maybe session or just "Python".

Reviewer 3: Good catch. Python would be better.

Author: i would have never caught this as i'm so used to saying kernel! thank you.

If you wish to install the package regularly (not in editable
mode) you can use:

- `python -m pip install . `

**Using `python -m` when calling `pip`**

Above, you use`python -m` to call the version of pip installed into your
current active environment. `python -m` is important to ensure that you are
calling the version of pip installed in your current environment.
:::

#### Look for pyospackage in your environment

Once you have installed your package, you can view it in your current
environment. If you are using `venv` or `conda`, `pip` list will allow you
to see your current package installations.

> Note that because pyospackage is installed in editable mode (`-e`) pip will show you the past to where you package installation's code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that because pyospackage is installed in editable mode (`-e`) pip will show you the directory path to your project's code
```

> is.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

nox                           2021.10.1
numpy                         1.24.2
packaging                     23.0
pandas                        1.5.3
pyosPackage                   0.1.0          /Users/yourusername/path/here/pyosPackage
...
...
...
```

### 6. Test out your new package

After installing your package, type “python” at the command prompt to start
a Python session in your active Python environment.

You can now import your package and access the `add_num` function.

```bash
➜ python
Python 3.11.4 | packaged by conda-forge | (main, Jun 10 2023, 18:08:41) [Clang 15.0.7 ] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> import pyospackage
>>> pyospackage.add_num(1, 2)
3
```

<!-- As you review - please tell me what you think about the section below.
There were some various opinions on whether to surface specific functionality
in a package. i've found it useful in my work when done thoughtfully.

But for beginners it could create more confusion if we don't provide
specific use-cases for doing this. Thoughts? -->

## OPTIONAL: Customize access to Python functions using the `__init__.py` file

Let's make one more tweak to the code.

> If `add_num` is a function that you think users will use often, you may want to add it to your `__init__.py` file to allow them to import the function directly from the package rather than from the module.

Reviewer 2: My 2¢, don't include this.

Author: removed.

> ### Add functions to your `__init__.py` file

Reviewer 2: Not what I expected. Upon reading this header I thought you would go on to describe how to define functions directly in an init file, not exporting sub-module functions.
IMO for a tiny package (exactly like this one) defining all or most of the logic directly in the __init__.py file is fine. In fact I often prefer it - though it might be a more confusing way of doing things to beginners.

Author: this section has been removed now !

To make a function or class available at the package level to a user, you can add it to the `__init__.py` file.

- Open the `__init__.py` file .
- At the top of the file add the import below.

```python
from pyospackage.add_numbers import add_num
```

Save the file.

Now, open up a NEW Python terminal or restart your Python kernel.

:::{admonition} Don't forget to restart your Python kernel!
:class: important

It's important that you restart your Python kernel if you wish to access the changes to your code that you just made.
:::

```python
> python
Python 3.10.12 | packaged by conda-forge | (main, Jun 23 2023, 22:41:52) [Clang 15.0.7 ] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> from pyospackage import add_num
>>> add_num(1,2)
3
```

The decision to add specific functions, methods or classes to your
`__init__.py` file is up to you. However be sure that you do this thoughtfully
considering what functionality in your package you want to "elevate" to the top
level vs. what makes the most sense to keep in individual modules.

> ### Congratulations! You created (the beginning of) your first Python package

Reviewer: (the beginning of) was kind of a surprise to me - I had assumed based on the information earlier in the tutorial that we could complete a basic package. I think clarifying earlier in the tutorial that this is only the beginning portion of a Python package could be helpful, as well as giving an idea of what the full process looks like, kind of like a roadmap.

Reviewer 3: I would recommend that: the user has created a Python package.

Later, we will learn how to publish that package.

Author: fixed it's the beginning in the sense that this is a series of lessons. but i can see how the wording would be super confusing so i removed it as carol suggested below!

You did it! You have now created a Python package that you can install into any Python environment. While there is still more to do, you have completed the first major step.

In the upcoming lessons you will:

* Add a [README file](2-add-readme.md) and [LICENSE ](4-add-license-file.md) to your package
* [Add more metadata to your `pyproject.toml`](5-pyproject-toml.md) file to support PyPI publication.
* [Learn how to build your your package distribution](6-publish-pypi.md) files (**sdist** and **wheel**) and publish to **test PyPI**.
* Finally you will learn how to publish to **conda-forge** from **PyPI**.

> If you have a package that is ready for the mainstream user then

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you have a package that is "install-ready" for another user, then
```

If you don’t wish to create each of the files and directories below, you
can always [fork and clone and customize the pyOpenSci example package.](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/pyosPackage)

## Step 1: Set Up the Package Directory Structure

Below you create the basic directory structure required
for your Python package. Note that there are instructions for creating the files and directories using shell. However you can also create files and directories in your preferred file directory tool (e.g. Finder on MAC or File Explorer on Windows or even a tool such as VS Code or Spyder) if you wish.

### Create your package's project directory structure
* Create a new project directory for your package. Choose a name for your package, preferably in lowercase and without spaces. For this tutorial we'll use `pyospackage`.

Inside the project directory:

- Create a directory called `src`
- Within the `src` directory, create a directory that is named after your package. This subdirectory will contain your package’s code.
- It is ok if the project directory for your package and the directory in `src` have the same name

```bash
# Create a project directory in shell and a src directory within

> mkdir -R pyospackage/src/pyospackage

Author: ```suggestion
mkdir -p pyospackage/src/pyospackage
```
